---
layout: post
title: "5th week: Oligopoly"
categories: 
---



---
**Lecture Material for this week:** 

 

- Slides: Oligopoly [PDF](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=12hYDTo0HSSU3phqaEcrhp5CBasj9BfR2)
- Exercises: Oligopoly [PDF](https://drive.google.com//uc?export=download&id=1tpM6uSbXxFPydrRzC3yDALL4-vh-wY1f)
- Problem Set 2 [PDF](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1K36tGJhqiKuNdd7npoLAzUj5utPC1nJ6)


---

This week we're moving on to Oligopolies, that is, markets in which firms share market power. There are two main types of competitive models: competition in outputs and competition in prices. Remarkably, these two models lead to vastly different predictions for market outcomes. We are going to learn about the relationship between these models and perfect competition, market concentration, and consider extensions in which firms make their choices sequentially.


Readings (supplementary, not mandatory)

- Pepall et al., Part III
- [Belleflamme & Peitz](https://www.cambridge.org/highereducation/books/industrial-organization/69870638F433E49AA6B20D24E3C9453E#contents), Chpt. 3 & 4

Learning Objectives

- Understand the strategic considerations of firms in different types of competition (price, output, simultaneous, sequential)
- Compare the model predictions to that of monopoly and perfect competition benchmarks
- Solve for equilibria in each of these models
Learn how to adapt the models to novel environments

---
### Videos

#### Introduction
<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=f9c2274c-b2ad-4b25-9a87-ac5c0119d0df&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=false&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>

#### Price Competition (Betrand)
<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=00757a1a-8dcd-4edb-a207-ac670130eabe&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=false&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>

#### Supply Competition (Cournot)
<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=f7be5222-80ac-4df0-ab52-ac6700d25953&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=false&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>

#### Sequential Supply Competition (Stackelberg)
<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=8eee2b39-1640-438f-a6ee-ac6b00c5d719&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=false&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>


---

**Exercise 1**

Consider a market with two firms engaging in price competition. The market has a differentiable demand function D(p), and the firms have identical cost function c(q) which we assume is convex and differentiable. The firm which sets the lower price attracts all consumers while the firm 1 attracts all customers if they set the same price. 

1. To solve this problem, we must transform the choice of the firms from setting prices to setting quantities. Describe the demand function for each firm as a function of its individual output, and (once you watched the next video on Cournot competition) explain the difference to the Cournot model. 
2. Draw a diagram that shows the demand function, the average cost and the marginal cost. 
3. Describe the nature of a Nash equilibrium in this model, and illustrate this in your diagram. Compare this with a monopoly / perfect competition outcome. 


**Exercise 2**

Next, consider two firms engaged in output competition. The demand function is P(q)=1-q. The cost function for each firm is c(q)=q/2+1/16. 

1. Derive the best response function for each firm. 
2. What is the optimal output for each firm if it was a monopolist.  Derive the corresponding price and profit. 
3. Characterise the Cournot equilibria in this model.

**Exercise 3** 

Consider a model with a leader and a follower. The market demand is D(p)=1-p. Each firm has the cost function c(q)=q2.   

1. Derive the best response for the follower for each output choice of the leader.
2. Given the best response in 1, find the optimal output for the leader. 
3. Characterise the Stackelberg equilibrium. 
