---
layout: post
title: "Monopoly: Menu Pricing and Bundling"
categories: 
---


## Overview: 

 This week, we will continue our study of monopoly pricing: menu pricing and bundling. Menu pricing is also called "screening" or "2nd degree price discrimination", the main idea is for the seller to offer a "menu" of different options so that different types of consumers "self-select" by buying different items from the menu. By designing this menu in just the right way, the seller may be able to increase profits relative to selling at a uniform price. Menu pricing is different from group pricing, because it relies on less information. With group pricing, the seller can differentiate several groups of buyers who differ in the willingness to pay. And this differentiation always increases profits (although, as we saw in the lecture and the problem set, the effect on consumers is ambiguous). Such differential pricing is not possible if there are no observable differences in consumers. One of the things the seller can do, however, is to create menus that induce buyers to sort themselves, based on their willingness to pay. For this to work we need one important assumption: single crossing! This condition means that those consumers with a higher willingness to pay for quantity/quality also benefit more from an increase in quantity/quality.

 In essence, this is price discrimination using unobservable differences across a single dimension. It is also possible to price discriminate across multiple dimensions using a technique called "bundling". Bundling is the practice of selling two different goods together as a bundle at a discount. By selling bundles, the seller can exploit heterogeneity in preferences to set prices closer to the buyers total willingness to pay.

<br>



- **Lecture Slides:** 
Monopoly: Menu Pricing and Bundling [(PDF)]([https://drive.google.com/file/d/10Ni9ZrCDLXvGZqfe7KpWRg_S5ptSq5zP/view?usp=sharing](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=10Ni9ZrCDLXvGZqfe7KpWRg_S5ptSq5zP))

- **Exercises**: Monopoly Pricing (Ex. 4 & 5): [(PDF)](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1teYrPqMMTB_fvxWQr_9j_E2DR9QAEB8P)

- **Readings** (supplementary, not mandatory)
  - Pepall et al., Chpt. 6.2 &amp; 8.1
  - Belleflamme &amp; Peitz, Chpt. 9 &amp; 11

<br>

- **Learning Objectives**
  - Understand the basic principle by which "price menus" can be used to induce buyers to "self-select" and raise profits
  - Identify the conditions for the optimality of a pricing menu, and under which conditions it performs better than a uniform price
  - Recognize the basic principle in which bundling can be used to price discriminate and raise profits
  - Be able to follow the basic steps of deriving the optimal prices of bundles, for both pure and mixed bundling.

<br>

---

<br>

## Lecture videos

#### Menu pricing

<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=da70b9dd-0845-4d84-89c2-ac5c01441398&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=true&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>
<p style="text-align: center;"></p>

#### Bundling
<p><iframe width="600" height="338" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" src="https://york.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=816bf849-0aca-487d-8799-ac5c0144424f&amp;autoplay=false&amp;offerviewer=true&amp;showtitle=false&amp;showbrand=false&amp;start=0&amp;interactivity=all" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allow="autoplay"></iframe></p>
